# CS50 FINAL PROJECT: SORTING VISUALIZER
#### Video Demo:  <https://youtu.be/BcQUCneEWok>
#### Description:  
This project demonstrates how different sorting algorithms work by visualizing what is actually happening to the data. Here we use arrays to visualize the size of data, generated randomly for this purpose. As those individual values are modified or moved, the visualizer will highlight the bars in yellow. There are user inputs which allow the user to specify the speed of sorting, the size of the array, and the algorithm used for sorting the arrays. While the array is being sorted, the user inputs are disabled. 

The index.html file contains the HTML layout of the page. It also allows the user to interact with the script and set user conditions, such as the size of the column, sorting speed and algorithm used. I used the range function to provide a slider to determine speed and array size, as this would be the most user friendly option. For picking the algorithm, there is a dropdown from which the user can select the desired algorithm. This also contains two buttons, one to generate a new array and one to execute the script. I created a container for the bars to reside in. Since this is a random size and the number of bars vary, the creation of the individual bars was done in jsvascript. 

The index.js file contains the script used for this program. I divided the page up into sections that make it easier to find variables, user actions, functions and the algorithm functions. The bars are created in this file under the renderBars() function on line 100. This creates a new element within the array-container for each index in the array. It is a function of the array size, which gets multiplied by a height factor and that number is used as the height. Something that tripped me up was fogetting to include something to clear the graph once the bars were rendered. I kept getting more and more bars, so I added in line 91, which clears the container for the next set of bars. This also contains the scripts for enabling and disabling he user inputs. I created these so that the user cannot interupt or change array properties in the middle of sorting. Something that is critical to the visualization of the algorithms, is the speed function. This causes a slight delay which allows the user to see the indivisual bar color changes - which helps visualize how each algorithm works. Without this, the code executes too fast for the use to see. 

I decided to go with the following sorting algorithms: bubble, selection, insertion, quick, merge and heap. I started with bubble, because I was already familiar with this from CS50. This was the easiest to implement of the algorithms and helped set the pace for how I could do the rest. Once this was up and running how I wanted it, I had something to work off of and refer to. The toughest was the merge sort. From what I saw online, it helps to create a separate array for merge sort. However, I wanted to visualize and show what this would look like by modifying one array. This resulted in days of trying to figure it out. Currently the algorithm works, however, every time the algorithm jumps to the next set to sort, it starts back at index 0. This is something that can be improved upon going forward. Maybe an index based approach would work better. 

Lastly, is the style.css file. This contains all of the elements that make the program visually appealing and user friendly. The page adapts to the window of the browser, as the page and the elements within it will flex to fit the screen.

This was my final project for CS50. I started this course with only some YouTube knowledge of the basics of Python. Since then, I have learned so much about what coding is, how the inernet works, and what direction I want to take my learnings next. I am incredibly thankful for David Malan and the team for creating this course and empowering others to learn on their own. 
